.Dd Mar 28, 2019
.Dt MROUTECTL 8 SMM
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mroutectl
.Nd Control and status query tool for
.Xr mrouted 8
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm mroutectl
.Op Fl dpthv
.Op COMMAND
.Pp
.Nm
.Ar help | kill | restart
.Pp
.Nm
.Ar debug Op ? | none | SYSTEM Op ,SYSTEM
.Nm
.Ar log Op ? | none | LEVEL
.Pp
.Nm
.Ar show igmp Op Ar interfaces | groups
.Nm
.Ar show interfaces
.Nm
.Ar show mfc
.Nm
.Ar show routes
.Nm
.Op Ar show status
.Nm
.Ar show version
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is the friendly control tool for
.Xr mrouted 8 .
It can be used to query status, debug, restart, and kill a running
.Nm mrouted .
Commands can be abbreviated to the minimum unambiguous prefix; for
example,
.Cm s s
for
.Cm show status .
.Sh OPTIONS
This program follows the usual UNIX command line syntax, with long
options starting with two dashes (`-').  The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl d, -detail
Detailed output, where applicable, see each command below.
.It Fl h, -help
Show usage instructions and exit.
.It Fl p, -plain
Use plain table headings, no ANSI ctrl characters.
.It Fl t, -no-heading
Skip table headings altogether.
.It Fl v, -version
Show
.Nm mrouted
version that
.Nm
is built against.
.El
.Sh COMMANDS
The following commands are available:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Nm Ar debug Op ? | none | SYSTEM Op ,SYSTEM
Control
.Nm mrouted
subystem debugging at runtime.  Multiple subsystems can be
enabled, separate with comma.  E.g.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mroutectl debug igmp,routes
.Ed
.Pp
The command returns a list of enabled subsystems.  Without any debug
argument, the command lists the currently enabled subsystems.  To list
all available subsystems, use
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mroutectl debug ?
.Ed
.Pp
To disable all subsystems, use
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mroutectl debug none
.Ed
.Pp
Available subsystems:
.Bl -tag -width "route-detail | rtdetail" -compact -offset indent
.It Cm packet | pkt
Debug inbound/outbout packets
.It Cm pruning | prunes
Pruning operations, or pruned routes
.It Cm routing | routes
Routing messages
.It Cm route-detail | rtdetail
Detailed routing information
.It Cm neighbors | peers
Neighbor gossip
.It Cm kernel
Debug kernel access
.It Cm cache
Debug routing cache
.It Cm timer
Debug timers
.It Cm interface | vif
Show interface (VIF) debug messages
.It Cm membership | groups
Debug multicast group memberships
.It Cm traceroute | mtrace
Multicast traceroute information
.It Cm igmp
Debug IGMP, including DVMRP, messages
.It Cm icmp
Debug ICMP messages
.It Cm rsrr
Debug RSRR messages
.It Cm all | 3
Enable all subsystems (may trigger log rate limiter)
.El
.It Nm Ar help
Show usage instructions and exit.
.It Nm Ar kill
Stop a running
.Nm mrouted ,
similar to sending SIGTERM.
.Nm
returns when the command has been delivered and
.Nm mrouted
has begun shutting down.
.It Nm Ar log Op ? | none | LEVEL
Control, query, or disable
.Xr mrouted 8
log level.  E.g.
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mroutectl log debug
.Ed
.Pp
Without any argument, the command lists the current log level.
To list all available log levels, use
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mroutectl log ?
.Ed
.Pp
To disable logging completely, use
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mroutectl log none
.Ed
.Pp
Available log levels:
.Bl -tag -width WARNING -compact -offset indent
.It Cm none
Disable all logging
.It Cm error
Error conditions
.It Cm warning
Warning conditions
.It Cm notice
Normal but significant condition (Default)
.It Cm info
Informational
.It Cm debug
Debug-level messages
.El
.It Nm Ar restart
Restart daemon and reload
.Pa /etc/mrouted.conf ,
like sending SIGHUP to
.Xr mrouted 8
.It Nm Ar show compat
Previously available as
.Nm mrouted Fl r ,
as well as sending
.Ar SIGUSR1
to
.Xr mrouted 8 ,
to get output in
.Pa /var/run/mrouted/mrouted.dump .
.Sy Note:
this command is only intended for developers and hard core
.Nm
users, it can be hard to read.  See below EXAMPLES section for more help.
.It Nm Ar show igmp Op Ar interfaces | groups
Show IGMP status for interfaces and groups.  To show only the interfaces
or groups, use the following sub-arguments:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width interfaces -compact
.It Ar interfaces
Show IGMP interface status; elected IGMP querier, expiration timer, and
IGMP version used per link, number of joined groups per link.
.It Ar groups
Show IGMP group memberships per interface; last reporter, and expiration
timer.
.El
.It Nm Ar show interfaces
Show interface table; address, state, cost (metric) for interface,
threshold TTL (required for crossing), uptime (still TODO), and
interface flags like: Querier, Leaf, etc.
.It Nm Ar show mfc
Show multicast forwarding cache, i.e., the actual multicast routing
table.  Use
.Fl d
for more detailed output, including pruning information.  The 'P'
and ':p' shows upstream and downstream prunes, respectively.
.It Nm Ar show neighbor
Show information about DVMRP neighbors.
.It Nm Ar show routes
Show DVMRP routing table, i.e. the unicast routing table used for RPF
calculations.
.It Nm Op Ar show status
Show
.Xr mrouted 8
status summary, default.
.It Nm Ar show version
Show version, and uptime if
.Fl d
is given,
of running mrouted
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
This section shows example interactions with
.Nm
for some of the supported commands.
.Ss Sy mroutectl show iface
.Bd -literal -offset indent
Address         Interface      State Cost TTL    Uptime Flags
10.0.1.2        eth0              Up    1   1  00:00:00
172.16.1.1      eth1              Up    1   1  00:00:00 QL
.Ed
.Ss Sy mroutectl show neighbor
.Bd -literal -offset indent
Neighbor        Interface       Version Flags    Uptime Expire                  
10.0.1.2        eth0            3.255   G       0:00:16    25s
10.0.1.1        eth0            3.255   G       0:00:17    30s
.Ed
.Ss Sy mroutectl -d show routes
.Bd -literal -offset indent
Origin          Neighbor        Interface        Cost   Expire                  
192.168.0/24    10.0.1.1        eth0                3      30s
172.16.1/24     10.0.1.2        eth0                2      30s
172.16.0/24     Local           eth1                1      60s
10.0.1/24       Local           eth0                1      60s
10.0.0/24       10.0.1.1        eth0                2      30s
.Ed
.Ss Sy mroutectl show igmp iface
.Bd -literal -offset indent
Interface         Querier          Version  Groups  Expire                      
eth1              Local                  3       1   Never
eth0              10.0.1.1               3       0    220s
.Ed
.Ss Sy mroutectl show igmp group
.Bd -literal -offset indent
Interface         Group            Last Reporter    Expire                      
eth1              225.1.2.6        172.16.0.10        190s
.Ed
.Ss Sy mroutectl -d show mfc       
.Bd -literal -offset indent
Origin          Group           Inbound         <>    Uptime   Expire  Outbound 
192.168.0/24    225.1.2.3       eth0            P    0:10:42  0:04:03  
192.168.0/24    225.1.2.4       eth0            P    0:10:42  0:03:42  
192.168.0/24    225.1.2.5       eth0            P    0:10:42  0:04:49  
172.16.1/24     225.1.2.6       eth0                 0:10:51  0:00:24  eth1 
192.168.0/24    225.1.2.6       eth0                 0:10:42  0:01:51  eth1 
172.16.1/24     225.1.2.7       eth0            P    0:10:51  0:03:13  
192.168.0/24    225.1.2.7       eth0            P    0:10:42  0:01:16  
172.16.1/24     225.1.2.8       eth0            P    0:10:51  0:02:07  
192.168.0/24    225.1.2.8       eth0            P    0:10:42  0:00:09  

Source          Group           Inbound               Uptime  Packets     Bytes 
172.16.1.11     225.1.2.6       eth0                 0:10:51     6518    834304
192.168.0.10    225.1.2.6       eth0                 0:10:42     6425    822400
.Ed
.Ss Sy mroutectl -dp show compat
The output from the
.Ar compat
command is very verbose and looks quite scary at first sight.  It is
kept for backwards compatibility and developer debug purposes and has
a lot of details encoded.  See below for a breakdown.
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
Virtual Interface Table
 VIF  Local-Address                    Metric  Thresh  Flags
  0   36.2.0.8      subnet: 36.2          1       1    querier
                    groups: 224.0.2.1
                            224.0.0.4
                   pkts in: 3456
                  pkts out: 2322323

  1   36.11.0.1     subnet: 36.11         1       1    querier
                    groups: 224.0.2.1
                            224.0.1.0
                            224.0.0.4
                   pkts in: 345
                  pkts out: 3456

  2   36.2.0.8      tunnel: 36.8.0.77     3       1
                     peers: 36.8.0.77 (2.2)
                boundaries: 239.0.1
                          : 239.1.2
                   pkts in: 34545433
                  pkts out: 234342

  3   36.2.0.8	    tunnel: 36.6.8.23	  3       16

Multicast Routing Table (1136 entries)
 Origin-Subnet   From-Gateway    Metric Tmr In-Vif  Out-Vifs
 36.2                               1    45    0    1* 2  3*
 36.8            36.8.0.77          4    15    2    0* 1* 3*
 36.11                              1    20    1    0* 2  3*
 .
 .
 .
.Ed
.Pp
In this example, there are four VIFs connecting to two subnets and two
tunnels.
The VIF 3 tunnel is not in use (no peer address).
The VIF 0 and VIF 1 subnets have some groups present;
tunnels never have any groups.
This instance of
.Nm mrouted
is the one responsible for sending periodic group membership queries on the
VIF 0 and VIF 1 subnets, as indicated by the "querier" flags.
The list of boundaries indicate the scoped addresses on that interface.
A count of the number of incoming and outgoing packets is also
shown at each interface.
.Pp
Associated with each subnet from which a multicast datagram can originate
is the address of the previous hop router (unless the subnet is directly-
connected), the metric of the path back to the origin, the amount of time
since we last received an update for this subnet, the incoming VIF for
multicasts from that origin, and a list of outgoing VIFs.
"*" means that the outgoing VIF is connected to a leaf of the broadcast
tree rooted at the origin, and a multicast datagram from that origin will
be forwarded on that outgoing VIF only if there are members of the
destination group on that leaf.
.Pp
.Nm mrouted
also maintains a copy of the kernel forwarding cache table.
Entries are created and deleted by
.Nm mrouted .
.Pp
The cache tables look like this:
.Bd -literal -offset left
Multicast Routing Cache Table (147 entries)
 Origin             Mcast-group     CTmr  Age Ptmr IVif Forwvifs
 13.2.116/22        224.2.127.255     3m   2m    -  0    1
\*(Gt13.2.116.19
\*(Gt13.2.116.196
 138.96.48/21       224.2.127.255     5m   2m    -  0    1
\*(Gt138.96.48.108
 128.9.160/20       224.2.127.255     3m   2m    -  0    1
\*(Gt128.9.160.45
 198.106.194/24     224.2.135.190     9m  28s   9m  0P
\*(Gt198.106.194.22
.Ed
.Pp
Each entry is characterized by the origin subnet number and mask and the
destination multicast group.
.Pp
The 'CTmr' field indicates the lifetime of the entry.
The entry is deleted from the cache table when the timer decrements to zero.
The 'Age' field is the time since this cache entry was originally created.
Since cache entries get refreshed if traffic is flowing,
routing entries can grow very old.
.Pp
The 'Ptmr' field is simply a dash if no prune was sent upstream, or the
amount of time until the upstream prune will time out.
The 'Ivif' field indicates the incoming VIF for multicast packets from
that origin.
.Pp
Each router also maintains a record of the number of prunes received from
neighboring routers for a particular source and group.
.Pp
If there are no members of a multicast group on any downward link of the
multicast tree for a subnet, a prune message is sent to the upstream router.
They are indicated by a "P" after the VIF number.
.Pp
The Forwvifs field shows the interfaces along which datagrams belonging to
the source-group are forwarded.
.Pp
A "p" indicates that no datagrams are being forwarded along that interface.
An unlisted interface is a leaf subnet with no members of the particular
group on that subnet.
.Pp
A "b" on an interface indicates that it is a boundary interface, i.e.\&
traffic will not be forwarded on the scoped address on that interface.
An additional line with a
.Sq \*(Gt
as the first character is printed for
each source on the subnet.
.Pp
Note that there can be many sources in one subnet.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /var/run/mrouted.sock -compact
.It Pa /etc/mrouted.conf
Main configuration file.
.It Pa /var/run/mrouted.sock
.Ux Ns -domain
socket used for communication with
.Xr mrouted 8
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mrouted 8 ,
.Xr mrouted.conf 5
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
was written by Joachim Nilsson.
