.\" Hey Emacs, this is -*- nroff -*- mode
.\" The mrouted program is covered by the license in the accompanying file
.\" named "LICENSE".  Use of the mrouted program represents acceptance of
.\" the terms and conditions listed in that file.
.\"
.\" The mrouted program is COPYRIGHT 1989 by The Board of Trustees of
.\" Leland Stanford Junior University.
.Dd Jan 1, 2021
.Dt MROUTED.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mrouted.conf
.Nd mrouted configuration file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /etc/mrouted.conf
.Sh DESCRIPTION
In many cases you do not need to configure
.Nm mrouted .
It configures itself automatically to forward multicast on all
multicast-capable interfaces, i.e., interfaces that have the
.Cm IFF_MULTICAST
flag set, excluding the loopback interface.  It locates other DVMRP
capable routers directly reachable via those interfaces.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width TERM -compact -offset indent
.It Nm mrouted
will not start with less than two enabled virtual interfaces (VIFs).  A
VIF is either a physical multicast-capable interface or a tunnel.
.It Nm mrouted
will log a warning if all of its VIFs are tunnels; such a configuration
is likely better replaced by more direct (GRE) tunnels (i.e. eliminate
the middle man).
.El
.Pp
To override the default settings, for example to add tunnel links to
other DVMRP routers, configuration commands may be placed in
.Pa /etc/mrouted.conf .
The file format is free-form: whitespace (including newlines) is not
significant.  The
.Dq #\&
character marks start of a comment to end of line.
.Bl -tag -offset indent
.It Cm cache-lifetime Ar <60-86400>
This setting defines the time in seconds that a cached multicast route
stays in kernel before timing out.  The value of this entry should lie
between 300 (5 min) and 86400 (1 day).  It defaults to 300.
.It Cm prune-lifetime Ar <120-86400>
The average lifetime in seconds of prunes sent towards parents.  The
actual lifetimes are randomized in the range [.5secs, 1.5secs].  Smaller
values cause less state to be kept both at this router and the parent,
at the cost of more frequent broadcasts.  However, some routers (e.g.
mrouted <3.3 and all currently known versions of Cisco's IOS) do not use
the DVMRP generation ID to determine that a neighbor has rebooted.
Prunes sent towards these neighbors should be kept short, in order to
shorten the time to recover from a reboot.  For use in this situation,
the
.Cm prune-lifetime
keyword may be specified on an interface as described below.  It
defaults to 7200.
.It Cm name Ar boundary-name scoped-addr Ns / Ns Ar mask-len
The
.Cm name
option assigns names to boundaries to make configuration per
interface/tunnel easier.
.It Cm noflood
.Nm mrouted
uses a DVMRP optimization to prevent having to keep individual routing
tables for each neighbor; part of this optimization is that
.Nm mrouted
assumes that it is the forwarder for each of its attached subnets on
startup.  This can cause duplicates for a short period (approximately
one full route report interval), since both the router that just started
up and the proper forwarder will be forwarding traffic.  This behavior
can be turned off with the
.Cm noflood
keyword;
.Nm mrouted
will not assume that it is the forwarder on startup.  Turning on
.Cm noflood
can cause black holes on restart, which generally lasts approximately
one full route report interval.
.Pp
The
.Cm noflood
keyword can also be specified on individual interfaces.
.It Cm rexmit-prunes Op Ar on | off
The default is to retransmit prunes on all point-to-point interfaces
(including tunnels) but no multi-access interfaces.  This option may be
used to make the default on (or off) for all interfaces.
.Pp
The
.Cm rexmit-prunes
keyword can also be specified on individual interfaces.
.It Cm no router-alert
Some multicast routers, and some IGMP snooping switches, do not support
IP options like Router Alert, which is enabled in
.Nm mrouted
by default.  This command to disable this IP option.  Regardless of this
setting,
.Nm mrouted
always calculates the IP payload offset based on the IP header length
value of ingressing DVMRP and IGMP frames.
.It Cm router-timeout Ar <1-1024>
Known in the RFC as Other Querier Present Interval, controls the timer
used to detect when an elected IGMP querier stops sending queries.  When
the timer expires,
.Nm mrouted
will assume the role as querier.  The default is calculated based on the
.Cm igmp-robustness
value, see below.  Setting this to any value overrides the RFC
algorithm, which may be necessary in some scenarios.
.Pp
.Sy Note:
it is strongly recommended to leave this setting commented out.  Use the
.Cm igmp-robustness
setting to tweak behavior instead.
.It Cm igmp-query-interval Ar <1-1024>
This setting controls the IGMP query interval in seconds, used when this
router is elected querier on a LAN.  The query interval on all eligable
IGMP queriers on a LAN must be the same.  Default: 125.
.Pp
.Sy Note:
this value must be greater than the
.Cm igmp-query-response-interval .
.It Cm igmp-query-response-interval Ar <1-1024>
Controls the Max Resp Code in IGMP queries, which encodes the maximum
time allowed before responding to a query.  Can be used to control the
burstiness of IGMP/MLD traffic, a lower value causes burstier traffic.
Default 10 sec.
.Pp
.Sy Note:
this value must always be less than the
.Cm igmp-query-interval .
.It Cm igmp-query-last-member-interval Ar <1-1024>
This setting controls the maximum time in seconds between group specific
IGMP queries.  These are sent as response to a host on a LAN requesting
to leave a multicast group.  The purpose is to double-check that there
is no other host on the LAN that still wants the group.  Default: 1.
.Pp
See also
.Cm igmp-robustness
(below), which controls how many group-specific queries are sent.
.It Cm igmp-robustness Ar <2-10>
The robustness setting controls many aspects of IGMP timers, for end
devices and routers alike.  Default 2.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -indent
.It Group Membership Timeout
Number of seconds before
.Nm mrouted
determines that there are no more members of a group on a LAN.  Formula:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
robustness x query-interval + query-response-interval
.Ed
.It Other Querier Present Interval
Number of seconds before
.Nm mrouted
determines there is no longer an elected querier on the LAN.  See also
.Cm router-timeout .
Formula:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
robustness x query-interval + query-response-interval / 2
.Ed
.It Last Member Query Count
Number of group-specific queries sent before
.Nm mrouted
assumes there are no further local members of a group on the LAN.  The
number of group-specific queries is equal to the value of the robustness
variable.
.El
.It Cm no phyint 
By default all interfaces are enabled.  This command disables all
interfaces, useful on routers with lots of interfaces where
.Nm mrouted
should run on only only a select few.
.Pp
.Sy Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
no phyint
phyint eth10 enable
phyint eth12 enable
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Note:
Most UNIX kernels, including Linux, have a hard coded limit of 32 VIFs.
In non-trivial setups this limit is often reached, causing weird errors
that can be difficuly to debug.  The recommendation for those cases is
to disable all phyint (this setting), and then selectively enable only
the ones needed.
.It Cm phyint Ar <local-addr | ifname> Oo Cm disable | enable Oc Oo Cm passive Oc Oo Cm blaster Oc Oo Cm force-leaf Oc Oo Cm noflood Oc Oo Cm igmpv1 | igmpv2 | igmpv3 Oc Oo Cm static-group Ar group Oc Oo Cm altnet Ar network Ns / Ns Ar mask-len Oc Oo Cm boundary Ar boundary-name | scoped-addr Ns / Ns Ar mask-len Oc Oo Cm metric Ar <1-31> Oc Oo Cm advert-metric Ar <0-31> Oc Oo Cm prune-lifetime Ar sec Oc Oo Cm rexmit-prunes Oo Ar on | off Oc Oc Oo Cm allow-nonpruners Oc Oo Cm notransit Oc Oo Cm accept|deny Po Ar route Ns / Ns Ar mask-len Oo Cm exact Oc Pc Ns + Oo Cm bidir Oc Oc Oo Cm rate-limit Ar kbps Oc Oo Cm threshold Ar ttl Oc
.Pp
This setting selects and alters properties of the physical interfaces
.Nm mrouted
operates on.  Interfaces can be identified using their local IP address
or their name.
.Pp
.Sy NOTE:
All
.Cm phyint
commands must precede tunnel commands.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width TERM -compact -offset indent
.It Cm disable | enable
Selectively disable or enable this interface.  Only enabled interfaces
get a VIF in the kernel.
.It Cm beside Op on | off
This is a tunnel option.  For compatibility with older
.Nm mrouted
routers the default is to unicast control traffic "beside" the tunnel.
To encapsulate all control traffic inside the tunnel use
.Cm beside Ar off .
.It Cm igmpv1 | igmpv2 | igmpv3
.Nm mrouted
supports all IGMP versions.  Use these flags to force compatibility
modes on the given interface.  Default:
.Cm igmpv3
.It Cm static-group Ar group
This setting makes
.Nm mrouted
behave as if an IGMPv2 join for
.Ar group
was received on the
.Cm phyint .
Useful when there is no IGMP capable hosts on the LAN, or when a group
should always be routed.  The group is listed as
.Cm static
in the
.Nm mroutectl
output.
.Pp
In setups where there is only a single multicast router running
.Nm mrouted ,
this works just as a (*,G) route in
.Xr smcrouted 8 .
With the added exception for better handling of dynamic changes to the
input interface.
.Pp
This can also be used for testing routing without having to set up IGMP
capable receivers.
.It Cm join-group Ar group
This setting makes
.Nm mrouted
join the desired
.Ar group
on the
.Cm phyint
connected to the LAN which is source of the multicast to be forwarded.
Useful when there are switches with IGMP snooping that do not detect
.Nm mrouted
as a multicast router, and thus prevent flooding multicast on the
corresponding port.  Most managed switches support configuring a
static multicast router port, but sometimes that is not available,
or access to the switch is restricted.
.It Cm altnet Ar network Ns / Ns Ar mask-len
If an interface is attached to multiple IP subnets, describe each
additional subnet with this keyword.
.It Cm boundary Ar boundary-name | scoped-addr Ns / Ns Ar mask-len
allows an interface to be configured as an administrative boundary
for the specified scoped address.
Packets belonging to this address will not be forwarded on a scoped interface.
The boundary option accepts either a name or a boundary spec.
.It Cm metric Ar <1-31>
is the "cost" associated with sending a datagram on the given interface
or tunnel; it may be used to influence the choice of routes.  The
.Cm metric
defaults to 1.  Metrics should be kept as small as possible, because
.Nm mrouted
cannot route along paths with a sum of metrics greater than 31.
.It Cm advert-metric Ar <0-31>
The "cost" advertised to neighbors for the given interface or tunnel; it
may be used to influence the choice of routes on the neighbor side.  The
.Cm advert-metric
defaults to 0.  Note that the effective metric of a link is one end's
.Cm metric
plus the other end's
.Cm advert-metric .
.It Cm force-leaf
Force
.Nm mrouted
to ignore other routers on this interface.
.Nm mrouted
will never send or accept neighbor probes or route reports on this
interface.
.It Cm noflood
As described above, but only applicable to this interface/tunnel.
.It Cm passive
No packets will be sent on this link or tunnel until we hear from the
other end.  This is useful for the "server" end of a tunnel that goes
over a dial-on-demand link; configure the "server" end as passive and it
will not send its periodic probes until it hears one from the other
side, so will not keep the link up.  If this option is specified on both
ends of a tunnel, the tunnel will never come up.
.It Cm blaster
Enable handling of routers (mostly Cisco) that overwhelm socket buffers
by "blasting" the whole routing table at once.
.It Cm prune-lifetime Ar sec
As described above, but only applicable to this interface/tunnel.
.It Cm rexmit-prunes Op Ar on | off
As described above, but only applicable to this interface/tunnel.
Recall that prune retransmission defaults to
.Ar on
on point-to-point links and tunnels, and
.Ar off
on multi-access links.
.It Cm allow-nonpruners
By default,
.Nm mrouted
refuses to peer with DVMRP neighbors that do not claim to support
pruning.  This option allows such peerings on this interface.
.It Cm notransit
A specialized case of route filtering; no route learned from an
interface marked
.Cm notransit
will be advertised on another interface marked
.Cm notransit .
Marking only a single interface
.Cm notransit
has no meaning.
.It Cm accept|deny Po Ar route Ns / Ns Ar mask-len Oo Cm exact Oc Pc Ns + Oo Cm bidir Oc
The
.Cm accept
and
.Cm deny
commands allow rudimentary route filtering.  The
.Cm accept
command causes
.Nm mrouted
to accept only the listed routes on the configured interface; the
.Cm deny
command causes
.Nm mrouted
to accept all but the listed routes.  Only one of
.Cm accept
or
.Cm deny
commands may be used on a given interface.
.Pp
The list of routes follows the
.Cm accept
or
.Cm deny
keyword.  If the keyword
.Ar exact
follows a route, then only that route is matched; otherwise, that route
and any more specific route is matched.  For example,
.Cm deny 0/0
denies all routes, while
.Cm deny 0/0 Ar exact
denies only the default route.  The default route may also be specified
with the
.Cm default
keyword.
.Pp
The
.Cm bidir
keyword enables bidirectional route filtering; the filter will be
applied to routes on both output and input.  Without the
.Cm bidir
keyword,
.Cm accept
and
.Cm deny
filters are only applied on input.  Poison reverse routes are never
filtered out.
.It Cm rate-limit Ar kbps
allows the network administrator to specify a certain bandwidth in kbps
which would be allocated to multicast traffic.  It defaults to 500 kbps
on tunnels, and 0 (unlimited) on physical interfaces.
.It Cm threshold Ar ttl
is the minimum IP time-to-live required for a multicast datagram to be
forwarded to the given interface or tunnel.  It is used to control the
scope of multicast datagrams.  (The TTL of forwarded packets is only
compared to the threshold, it is not decremented by the threshold.
Every multicast router decrements the TTL by 1.)  The default threshold
for multicast is 1.
.El
.It Cm tunnel Ar local-addr Ar remote-addr Oo Cm beside Oo Ar on | off Oc Oc Oo Cm boundary Ar boundary-name | scoped-addr Ns / Ns Ar mask-len Oc Oo Cm metric Ar <1-31> Oc Oo Cm advert-metric Ar <0-31> Oc Oo Cm noflood Oc Oo Cm passive Oc Oo Cm blaster Oc Oo Cm prune-lifetime Ar sec Oc Oo Cm rexmit-prunes Oo Ar on | off Oc Oc Oo Cm allow-nonpruners Oc Oo Cm rate-limit Ar kbps Oc Oo Cm threshold Ar ttl Oc
.Pp
This setting can be used to establish a tunnel link between local IP
address
.Ar local-addr
and remote IP address
.Ar remote-addr ,
and to associate a non-default metric or threshold with that tunnel.
The local IP address
.Ar local-addr
may be replaced by the interface name (e.g. le0).
The remote IP address
.Ar remote-addr
may be replaced by a host name, if and only if the host name has a
single IP address associated with it.  The tunnel must be set up in the
.Nm
files of both routers before it can be used.
.Pp
See the
.Cm phyint
command for details on the relevant tunnel options.
.El
.Pp
The
.Cm boundary
option to all commands can accept either a name or a network boundary;
the
.Cm boundary
and
.Cm altnet
options may be specified as many times as necessary.
.Pp
In general, all DVMRP routers connected to a particular subnet or tunnel
should use the same metric and threshold for that subnet or tunnel.
.Sh EXAMPLE CONFIGURATION
This is an example configuration for a mythical multicast router at a big
school.
.Bd -literal -offset left
#
# mrouted.conf example
#

# Name our boundaries to make it easier.
name LOCAL 239.255.0.0/16
name EE 239.254.0.0/16

# le1 is our gateway to compsci, don't forward our
# local groups to them.
phyint le1 boundary EE

# le2 is our interface on the classroom net, it has four
# different length subnets on it.
# Note that you can use either an IP address or an interface name
phyint 172.16.12.38 boundary EE
       altnet 172.16.15.0/26
       altnet 172.16.15.128/26
       altnet 172.16.48.0/24

# atm0 is our ATM interface, which doesn't properly
# support multicasting.
phyint atm0 disable

# This is an internal tunnel to another EE subnet.
# Remove the default tunnel rate limit, since this
# tunnel is over Ethernets.
tunnel 192.168.5.4 192.168.55.101
       metric 1 threshold 1 rate-limit 0

# This is our tunnel to the outside world.
# Careful with those boundaries, Eugene.
tunnel 192.168.5.4 10.11.12.13
       metric 1 threshold 32
       boundary LOCAL boundary EE
.Ed
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /var/lib/mrouted.genid -compact
.It Pa /etc/mrouted.conf
Main configuration file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mrouted 8 ,
.Xr mroutectl 8
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Joachim Wiberg Aq mailto:troglobit@gmail.com .
