.\"	$OpenBSD: mrouted.8,v 1.25 2014/09/08 01:27:55 schwarze Exp $
.\" The mrouted program is covered by the license in the accompanying file
.\" named "LICENSE".  Use of the mrouted program represents acceptance of
.\" the terms and conditions listed in that file.
.\"
.\" The mrouted program is COPYRIGHT 1989 by The Board of Trustees of
.\" Leland Stanford Junior University.
.Dd Mar 12 2019
.Dt MROUTED 8 SMM
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mrouted
.Nd IP multicast routing daemon
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm mrouted
.Op Fl hnpv
.Op Fl c Ar FILE
.Op Fl d Ar SYS[,SYS,...
.Op Fl l Ar LEVEL
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is an implementation of the Distance-Vector Multicast Routing
Protocol (DVMRP), an earlier version of which is specified in RFC 1075.
It maintains topological knowledge via a distance-vector routing protocol
(like RIP, described in RFC 1058), upon which it implements a multicast
datagram forwarding algorithm called Reverse Path Multicasting.
.Pp
.Nm
forwards a multicast datagram along a shortest (reverse) path tree
rooted at the subnet on which the datagram originates.
The multicast delivery tree may be thought of as a broadcast delivery
tree that has been pruned back so that it does not extend beyond those
subnetworks that have members of the destination group.
Hence, datagrams are not forwarded along those branches which have no
listeners of the multicast group.
The IP time-to-live of a multicast datagram can be
used to limit the range of multicast datagrams.
.Pp
In order to support multicasting among subnets that are separated by (unicast)
routers that do not support IP multicasting,
.Nm
includes (built-in) support for
"tunnels", which are virtual point-to-point links between pairs of
.Nm
daemons located anywhere in an internet.
IP multicast packets are encapsulated for transmission through tunnels,
so that they look like normal unicast datagrams to intervening routers
and subnets.
The encapsulation is added on entry to a tunnel, and stripped off on exit
from a tunnel.
By default, the packets are encapsulated using the IP-in-IP protocol
(IP protocol number 4).
Older versions of
.Nm
tunnel use IP source routing, which puts a heavy load on some
types of routers.
This version does not support IP source route tunneling.
.Pp
The tunneling mechanism allows
.Nm
to establish a virtual internet, for the purpose of multicasting only,
which is independent of the physical internet, and which may span
multiple Autonomous Systems.
This capability is intended for experimental support of internet
multicasting only, pending widespread support for multicast routing
by the regular (unicast) routers.
.Nm
suffers from the well-known scaling problems of any distance-vector
routing protocol, and does not support hierarchical multicast routing.
.Pp
A more common practise today is to set up GRE tunnels between multicast
capable routers and limit
.Nm
to run on a select number of interfaces listed in the configuration.
.Pp
.Nm
handles multicast routing only; there may or may not be unicast routing
software running on the same machine as
.Nm mrouted .
With the use of tunnels, it is not necessary for
.Nm
to have access to more than one physical subnet
in order to perform multicast forwarding.
.Pp
.Sh OPTIONS
This program follows the usual UNIX command line syntax, with long options starting
with two dashes (`--').  The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h, -help
Print a help message and exit.
.It Fl -missing-ok
If an interface in 
.Pa /etc/mrouted.conf
does not exist yet, print a warning and continue.  Useful with VPN, PPP
and other dynamic interfaces.  However,
.Nm mrouted
must still be restarted to start listening on such interfaces, if they
did not exist when
.Nm
was started.
.It Fl -no-interfaces
Change 
.Nm
default behavior and assume all interfaces are disabled unless
explicitly enabled with
.Cm phyint enable
in
.Pa /etc/mrouted.conf
.It Fl -startup-delay=DELAY
Wait for DELAY seconds before applying the routes. This delay enables
to exchange routes before starting to forward multicast packets and
therefore eliminate transient problems at startup, at the cost of a
momentary black hole. Defaults to 10 seconds.
.It Fl l, -loglevel=LEVEL
Set log level for syslog messages: none, err, notice (default), info,
debug. Use '?' for a complete list of supported log levels.
.It Fl n, -foreground
Run in foreground, do not detach from the calling terminal.
.It Fl f, -config=FILE
Specify an alternative configuration file, default
.Pa /etc/mrouted.conf
.It Fl d, -debug=SYS[,SYS,..]
This option enables subsystem debug messages and causes
.Nm
to run in the foreground of the starting terminal, regardless of the
.Fl n
option.  The
.Fl l Ar LEVEL
flag controls the (syslog) log level of each subsystem.
.Pp
Available subystems:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width TERM -compact -offset indent
.It Cm packet | pkt
Debug inbound/outbout packets
.It Cm prunes | pruning
Pruning operations, or pruned routes
.It Cm routes | routing
Routing messages
.It Cm rtdetail | route-detail
Detailed routing information
.It Cm peers | neighbors
Neighbor gossip
.It Cm cache
Debug routing cache
.It Cm timer
Debug
.Nm
timer handling
.It Cm vif | interface
Show interface (VIF) debug messages
.It Cm groups | memebership
Debug group memberships
.It Cm mtrace | traceroute
Multicast traceroute information
.It Cm igmp
Debug IGMP messages
.It Cm icmp
Debug ICMP messages
.It Cm rsrr
Debug RSRR messages
.It Cm all | 3
Enable all debug messages
.El
.It Fl p
Start
.Nm
in a non-pruning mode.  This was previously used in routers for test purposes only.
However, this is no longer supported and this option is only kept for compatibility
reasons.
.El
.Pp
.Sh SIGNALS
.Nm
responds to the following signals:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width TERM -compact
.It HUP
Restart
.Nm mrouted
and reload the configuration file.
.It INT
Terminate execution gracefully, i.e., by sending good-bye messages to
all neighboring routers.
.It TERM
Same as INT.
.El
.Pp
For convenience,
.Nm
writes its process ID to
.Pa /var/run/mrouted.pid
when it has completed its start up and is ready to receive signals.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /var/lib/mrouted.genid -compact
.It Pa /etc/mrouted.conf
Main configuration file.
.It Pa /var/lib/mrouted.genid
DVMRP generation ID.  Used by neighboring DVRMP routers to detect when a
router is restarted.
.It Pa /var/run/mrouted.pid
Pidfile (re)created by
.Nm
daemon when it has started up and is ready to receive commands.
.It Pa /proc/net/ip_mr_cache
Holds active IPv4 multicast routes (Linux).
.It Pa /proc/net/ip_mr_vif
Holds the IPv4 virtual interfaces used by the active multicast routing
daemon (Linux).
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The routing table looks like this:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left
Virtual Interface Table
 Vif  Local-Address                    Metric  Thresh  Flags
  0   36.2.0.8      subnet: 36.2          1       1    querier
                    groups: 224.0.2.1
                            224.0.0.4
                   pkts in: 3456
                  pkts out: 2322323

  1   36.11.0.1     subnet: 36.11         1       1    querier
                    groups: 224.0.2.1
                            224.0.1.0
                            224.0.0.4
                   pkts in: 345
                  pkts out: 3456

  2   36.2.0.8      tunnel: 36.8.0.77     3       1
                     peers: 36.8.0.77 (2.2)
                boundaries: 239.0.1
                          : 239.1.2
                   pkts in: 34545433
                  pkts out: 234342

  3   36.2.0.8	    tunnel: 36.6.8.23	  3       16

Multicast Routing Table (1136 entries)
 Origin-Subnet   From-Gateway    Metric Tmr In-Vif  Out-Vifs
 36.2                               1    45    0    1* 2  3*
 36.8            36.8.0.77          4    15    2    0* 1* 3*
 36.11                              1    20    1    0* 2  3*
 .
 .
 .
.Ed
.Pp
In this example, there are four VIFs connecting to two subnets and two
tunnels.
The VIF 3 tunnel is not in use (no peer address).
The VIF 0 and VIF 1 subnets have some groups present;
tunnels never have any groups.
This instance of
.Nm
is the one responsible for sending periodic group membership queries on the
VIF 0 and VIF 1 subnets, as indicated by the "querier" flags.
The list of boundaries indicate the scoped addresses on that interface.
A count of the number of incoming and outgoing packets is also
shown at each interface.
.Pp
Associated with each subnet from which a multicast datagram can originate
is the address of the previous hop router (unless the subnet is directly-
connected), the metric of the path back to the origin, the amount of time
since we last received an update for this subnet, the incoming VIF for
multicasts from that origin, and a list of outgoing VIFs.
"*" means that the outgoing VIF is connected to a leaf of the broadcast
tree rooted at the origin, and a multicast datagram from that origin will
be forwarded on that outgoing VIF only if there are members of the
destination group on that leaf.
.Pp
.Nm
also maintains a copy of the kernel forwarding cache table.
Entries are created and deleted by
.Nm mrouted .
.Pp
The cache tables look like this:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left
Multicast Routing Cache Table (147 entries)
 Origin             Mcast-group     CTmr  Age Ptmr IVif Forwvifs
 13.2.116/22        224.2.127.255     3m   2m    -  0    1
\*(Gt13.2.116.19
\*(Gr13.2.116.196
 138.96.48/21       224.2.127.255     5m   2m    -  0    1
\*(Gt138.96.48.108
 128.9.160/20       224.2.127.255     3m   2m    -  0    1
\*(Gt128.9.160.45
 198.106.194/24     224.2.135.190     9m  28s   9m  0P
\*(Gt198.106.194.22
.Ed
.Pp
Each entry is characterized by the origin subnet number and mask and the
destination multicast group.
.Pp
The 'CTmr' field indicates the lifetime of the entry.
The entry is deleted from the cache table when the timer decrements to zero.
The 'Age' field is the time since this cache entry was originally created.
Since cache entries get refreshed if traffic is flowing,
routing entries can grow very old.
.Pp
The 'Ptmr' field is simply a dash if no prune was sent upstream, or the
amount of time until the upstream prune will time out.
The 'Ivif' field indicates the incoming VIF for multicast packets from
that origin.
.Pp
Each router also maintains a record of the number of prunes received from
neighboring routers for a particular source and group.
.Pp
If there are no members of a multicast group on any downward link of the
multicast tree for a subnet, a prune message is sent to the upstream router.
They are indicated by a "P" after the VIF number.
.Pp
The Forwvifs field shows the interfaces along which datagrams belonging to
the source-group are forwarded.
.Pp
A "p" indicates that no datagrams are being forwarded along that interface.
An unlisted interface is a leaf subnet with no members of the particular
group on that subnet.
.Pp
A "b" on an interface indicates that it is a boundary interface, i.e.\&
traffic will not be forwarded on the scoped address on that interface.
An additional line with a
.Sq \*(Gt
as the first character is printed for
each source on the subnet.
.Pp
Note that there can be many sources in one subnet.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mrouted.conf 5 ,
.Xr map-mbone 8 ,
.Xr mrinfo 8 ,
.Xr mtrace 8 ,
.Xr pimd 8 ,
.Xr smcroute 8
.Rs
.%A S. Deering
.%O Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM '88 Conference
.%T Multicast Routing in Internetworks and Extended LANs
.Re
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.An David Waitzman ,
.An Craig Partridge ,
.An Steve Deering ,
.An Ajit Thyagarajan ,
.An Bill Fenner ,
.An David Thaler , and
.An Daniel Zappala . 
With contributions by many others.
